Fine tune Network Boot provisioning (#4040)
theforeman/foreman-documentation: guides/common/modules/ref_pxe-loaders.adoc

|===
| PXE loader option | `filename` value | Use for

| *None*
| No filename passed
| Non-PXE booting, for example HTTP booting with iPXE or image-based provisioning

| *PXELinux BIOS*
| `pxelinux.0`
| BIOS machines with PXE booting

| *PXELinux UEFI*
| `pxelinux.efi`
| UEFI machines with PXE booting

| *Grub2 BIOS*
| `grub2/grub__arch__.0`
| BIOS machines with PXE booting

| *Grub2 UEFI*
| `__subdir__/grub2/grub__arch__.efi`
| UEFI machines with PXE boot using GRUB2

| *Grub2 UEFI SecureBoot*
| `__subdir__/grub2/shim__arch__.efi`
| SecureBoot-enabled UEFI machines with PXE booting

| *Grub2 UEFI HTTP*
| `http://__{smartproxy-example-com}__:8000/httpboot/__subdir__/grub2/grub__arch__.efi`
| UEFI machines with HTTP booting

| *Grub2 UEFI HTTPS*
| `https://__{smartproxy-example-com}__:{smartproxy_port}/httpboot/__subdir__/grub2/grub__arch__.efi`
| UEFI machines with HTTP booting over HTTPS

ifndef::satellite[]
| *Grub2 UEFI HTTPS SecureBoot*
| `https://__{smartproxy-example-com}__:{smartproxy_port}/httpboot/__subdir__/grub2/shim__arch__.efi`
| SecureBoot-enabled UEFI machines with HTTP booting over HTTPS
endif::[]

| *iPXE Embedded*
| {Project} iPXE URL

> | Retrieve the iPXE configuration embedded in the NIC firmware of the host

Author: ```suggestion
| Machines with iPXE embedded in their NIC firmware
```

:_mod-docs-content-type: REFERENCE

[id="pxe-loaders"]
= PXE loaders

In {Project}, a PXE loader defines the `filename` DHCPv4 option to use during provisioning.

> {Project} deploys the required files on TFTP {SmartProxy}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{Project} deploys the required files to TFTP {SmartProxy}.
```

.Limitations

> * {Project} can deploy the required booting files only for the `x86_64` architecture.

Reviewer 2: Any source for this? With Grub 2 you can clearly see it includes the architecture in the filename and there was code written explicitly to support non-x86_64.

ifdef::satellite[]
* {Team} does not provide support for iPXE workflows.
endif::[]

.PXE loaders and DHCPv4 filenames
|===
| PXE loader option | `filename` value | Use for

| *None*
| `""`

> | ?

Reviewer 2: I find a test that mentions it's for non-PXE: https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/ee1afb939ebfea220177b5066c4bb9744721cdfe/test/controllers/shared/pxe_loader_test.rb#L24-L28

I'd guess this is used for image based provisioning, but I see it's also used for some exotic operating systems: Solaris, Juniper JunOS, Cisco NX-OS, Huawei VRP. The last 3 all are network devices (routers, switches) which are special.

https://theforeman.org/manuals/3.15/index.html#4.4.3ProvisioningTemplates writes:
> None - no filename passed (e.g. for HTTP booting via iPXE)

| *PXELinux BIOS*
| `pxelinux.0`

> | BIOS machines with PXE booting

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| BIOS machines with PXE booting, loading a pxelinux executable
```

| *PXELinux UEFI*
| `pxelinux.efi`
| UEFI machines with PXE booting

| *Grub2 BIOS*
| `grub2/grub__arch__.0`
| BIOS machines with PXE booting

| *Grub2 UEFI*
| `__subdir__/grub2/grub__arch__.efi`
| UEFI machines with PXE booting

| *Grub2 UEFI SecureBoot*
| `__subdir__/grub2/shim__arch__.efi`
| SecureBoot-enabled UEFI machines with PXE booting

| *Grub2 UEFI HTTP*
| `http://__httpboot.example.com__/httpboot/__subdir__/grub2/grub__arch__.efi`
| UEFI machines with HTTP booting

| *Grub2 UEFI HTTPS*

> | `https://__httpboot.example.com__/httpboot/__subdir__/grub2/grub__arch__.efi`

Reviewer 2: Similar to above, this is served from the Smart Proxy but this time on the HTTPS interface. That listens on `{smartprox_port}` by default.

| UEFI machines with HTTP booting over HTTPS

ifndef::satellite[]
| *Grub2 UEFI HTTPS SecureBoot*
| `https://__httpboot.example.com__/httpboot/__subdir__/grub2/shim__arch__.efi`
| SecureBoot-enabled UEFI machines with HTTP booting over HTTPS
endif::[]

> | *iPXE Embedded*

Reviewer 2: I'll admin I don't know [iPXE](https://ipxe.org/) so this is mostly reverse engineering. I had hoped https://theforeman.org/manuals/3.15/index.html#4.4.3ProvisioningTemplates would document this but that is largely unchanged since 2018.

I can see https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/commit/c521c6e5bd19f2abbd30d51c0ad1a8e00f736fab implemented iPXE support.

Digging around I suspect this is for https://ipxe.org/embed and the way I read is that if you build your own iPXE image. You can embed the URL in there. The URL will be something like `http://foreman.example.com/unattended/iPXE`.

Reviewer 4: @ShimShtein On a "when should I use this option"-level it might be somewhat clearer, but in a more holistic sense it's still somewhat lacking.  
I.e. "PXE Loader: iPXE Capable NIC(s)" doesn't read particularly well, and it might easily be understood as "Is my NIC capable of running iPXE?" - which is almost exclusively a "yes", instead of "Does my NIC use iPXE in its PXE/option ROM?" which is more likely to be a "no".

I don't personally have any really good suggestions either, only things that go more technical about it - "iPXE in PXE ROM" or maybe "iPXE in NIC Firmware"

> | `nil`

Reviewer 2: This is a bit special: it returns the `iPXE` URL: https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/ee1afb939ebfea220177b5066c4bb9744721cdfe/app/models/operatingsystem.rb#L268

| ? with iPXE booting

| *iPXE UEFI HTTP*
| `http://__httpboot.example.com__/httpboot/ipxe-__arch__.efi`

> | ? with iPXE booting

Reviewer 2: This is for UEFI HTTP Boot. The full specification is on https://uefi.org/specifications but I think https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/HTTP-Boot is actually nicer because it's practical. This is equivalent to Grub2 UEFI HTTP, but then instead of Grub this is with iPXE.

| *iPXE Chain BIOS*
| `undionly-ipxe.0`

> | ? with iPXE booting

Reviewer 2: Similar to UEFI HTTP Boot, this is the iPXE parallel to `Grub2 BIOS`: the image itself is retrieved via PXE.

| *iPXE Chain UEFI*
| `ipxe.efi`

> | ? with iPXE booting

Reviewer 2: And this is the iPXE paralle to `Grub2 UEFI`.

|===

ifndef::orcharhino,satellite[]

> Other PXE loaders, such as *PXELinux UEFI* or *Grub2 ELF*, require additional configuration.

Reviewer 2: I wondered what `Grub2 ELF` actually was. https://projects.theforeman.org/issues/26051 mentions it's mainly for IBM POWER. Also found https://www.theforeman.org/2016/09/new-post.html and https://community.theforeman.org/t/netbooting-ibm-power9-via-petitboot/17104 via that. Interesting.
